---
title: partition of unity
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
status: Clean up
---
# Definition
Let $M$ be a [[20231220133911-topology|topological space]] with an open cover $(X_\alpha)_{\alpha \in A}$. 
A **paritition of unity subordinate to $(X_\alpha)$** is a family of continuous functions 
$$
(\psi_\alpha)_{\alpha \in A} \qquad \psi_\alpha :M \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}
$$
with the following properties:
1. $0 \leq \psi_\alpha \leq 1$ for all $\alpha \in A$ and all $x \in M$. 

2. $\{\text{supp} \ \psi_a \subset X_\alpha\}$ for each $\alpha \in A$. (Outside the open set $X_\alpha$, the function is 0). 

3. $\{\text{supp } \psi_\alpha\}_{\alpha \in A}$ is locally finite. (Each point in $M$ has a neighborhood that intersects with finitely many non-zero $\psi_\alpha$ non-zero.)

4. $\sum_{\alpha \in A} \psi_\alpha(x) = 1$ for all $x \in M$. 


> [!NOTE] Smooth partition of unity
> If $M$ is a [[20231222094707-smooth_manifold|smooth manifold]], then each of the functions $\psi_\alpha$ must be smooth. 

# Why care?
Partitions of unity give a good way to "glue" structures together on smooth manifolds. 
Since $\sum \psi_\alpha = 1$ then "multiplying" by a structure will allow us to (informally) spread it around open sets but ensure that it won't be changed on the open set that it is defined on. 

# Partitions of unity exist
Given an open cover $\{V_\alpha\}$ of a smooth manifold $M$, there exists a partition of unity $\{\psi_\alpha\}$ subordinate to $\{V_\alpha\}$. 

## Proof
Since a smooth manifold $M$ is paracompact, we can find a locally finite countable refinement $\{B_i\}$ of coordinate balls. 

Let $x \in X_\alpha \subset M$, then we can take the coordinate neighborhood $x \in U_x \subset X_\alpha$. 
Then chose a bump function $\varphi_i$ which is $1$ on a ball $x \in B_i \subset U_x$ and 0 outside $U_x$. 
This can be extended to the entire manifold by making it 0 everywhere for every other point. 
Since ${B_i}$ is locally finite, then there are only finitely many non-zero terms coming from neighborhoods of $x$. 

Therefore, we can know that the sum
$$ 
0 < \sum_i \varphi_i(x) \leq \infty
$$
is finite and must be positive. 

Then for each $X_\alpha$ we can take the function build from the above steps to be 
$$
\psi = \frac{\varphi_i}{\sum_i \varphi_i} 
$$
for $B_i \subset X_\alpha$. 

Thus
$$
\text{supp} \ \psi_i = \text{supp }\varphi_i \subset U_i \subset X_\alpha
$$
and
$$
\sum \psi_i= \frac{\sum_i\varphi_i}{\sum_i \varphi_i} = 1.
$$
These functions make the partition of unity.