---
title: Riemannian metric
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
status: Clean up
aliases:
 - Riemannian manifold
---
# Overview
A Riemannian metric is a generalization of the [[202410031424|inner product]] for a manifold. 
This is important since each tangent space might not be the "same" for different points on a manifold, so we need a notion of how inner products (and thus angles of linearizations) varies smoothly around the manifold. 

# Definition
Let $M$ be a [[20231222094707-smooth_manifold|smooth manifold]]. 
A **Riemannian metric** (usually denoted $g$) is a smooth assignment of inner products on [[202403251438|tangent spaces]] $T_pM$ for $p \in M$. 

Formally, $g$ is a covariant 2 [[202405230013|tensor field]] that is 

1. Symmetric. $g_p(x,y) = g_p(y,x)$ for $x,y \in T_pM$

2. Positive definite $g_p(x,x) > 0$ for $x \in T_pM$ such that $x \neq 0$. 


Yet another way to think about a Riemannian metric is to think of it as a smooth [[202404011123|section]] of the 2nd [[202410042311|symmetric power]] $S^2 T^*M$.
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
S^2 (T^*M) \arrow[d]\\
M \arrow[u, bend right = 30, "g", swap]

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```

# With coordinates
Let $(U, x^i)$ be a [[20231222093631-chart|chart]] on $M$. 
Using this chart, we have the coordinate [[202406282046|frame]] $\left\{ \frac{\partial}{\partial x^i} \right\}$ on $TM$ such that a vector field $X = X^i \frac{\partial}{\partial x^i}$.

A Riemannian metric is determined by 
$$
\begin{align*}
g_{ij} &= \left\langle \frac{\partial}{\partial x^i}, \frac{\partial}{\partial x_j} \right\rangle \\
&= g\left( \frac{\partial}{\partial x^i}, \frac{\partial}{\partial x_j} \right) \\ 
\end{align*}
$$
where $g_{ij} \in C^\infty(M, \mathbb{R})$. 

Given Einstein notation, we have 
$$
g(X,Y) = g_{ij}X^iY^j
$$

# Differences from symplectic form
On a vector space, we can always use the Gram Schmidt process to find an orthonormal basis $\{e_i\}$. 
This acts as a global chart for the vector space, and the inner product in these coordinates is simply the identity matrix. 

For a Riemannian manifold, $(M,g)$, we can find an orthonormal frame $\{e_i\}$ for the tangent bundle, but don't expect it to be a coordinate frame. 
In other words, there is no guarantee that we will always find coordinates that will all be orthonormal under $g$. 

This is because there can be local invariants in Riemannian manifolds. 
This is different from [[202404062124|symplectic manifolds]] which by [[202406282200|Darboux thoerem]] says that there are no local invariants and there will always be a local chart that makes the symplectic form into the "standard" symplectic form. 

# Examples
## $\mathbb{R}^n$ 
Consider the manifold $(\mathbb{R}^n, g_{\text{Euc}})$. 
This is the normal "dot product" or inner product on the vector space. 

Therefore, 
$$ 
\begin{align*}
g_{\text{Euc}} &= g_{ij}dx^i dx^j \qquad g_{ij} = \delta_j^i\\
&= \sum(dx^i)^2
\end{align*}
$$

## $S^2$ 
Using spherical coordinates
$$
(\varphi, \theta) \longmapsto (\sin\varphi \cos \theta, \sin\varphi \sin \theta, \cos \varphi)
$$
then 
$$
g = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & \sin^2 \varphi\end{bmatrix}
$$

## $S^2$ again!
Now using [[202410042340|stereographic projection]]:

#todo ADD EQUATIONS HERE...

Using the above formulas, we have 
$$
\left| \frac{\partial}{\partial u}\right| = \left| \frac{\partial}{\partial v}\right| = 1-z \quad \text{and} \quad \frac{\partial}{\partial u} \cdot \frac{\partial}{\partial v} = 0
$$

Therefore, this gives the metric (after some algebraic manipulation)
$$
g_{ij} = \begin{bmatrix} \left(\frac{2}{1 + u^2 + v^2} \right)^2 & 0 \\
0 & \left(\frac{2}{1 + u^2 + v^2} \right)^2
\end{bmatrix}
$$

