---
title: measure
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
---
# measure

For a set X with $\sigma$ -algebra $\mathcal{S}$ on X. A measure on $(X, \mathcal{S})$ is a function $\mu : \mathcal{S} \to [0, \infty]$ such that:

1. $\mu(\emptyset) = 0$
2. $\mu \left( \bigcup^\infty_{k=1} E_k \right) = \sum^\infty_{k=1} \mu(E_k)$ for disjoint sets $E_1, E_2, ... \in \mathcal{S}$

# Properties
## Preserves Order
For sets $A \subset B \implies \mu(A) \leq \mu(B)$
### Proof
Since $A \subset B$, $\exists C \subset B$ such that $A = B/C$ or $B = A \sqcup C \implies \mu(B) = \mu(A) + \mu(C)$
Because $\mu(C) \geq 0$ we know that $\mu(B) \geq \mu(A)$
## Measure of set difference
For sets $A \subset B \implies \mu(B \backslash A) = \mu(B) - \mu(A)$
### Proof
This one is pretty obvious...
## Countable subadditivity
For measure space $(X, \mathcal{S}, \mu)$, and $E_1, E_2, ... \in \mathcal{S}$,
$$\mu\left( \bigcup^\infty_{k=1} E_k \right) \leq \sum_{k=1}^\infty \mu(E_k)$$

Note: This is a big one. Very important theorem.
### Proof
Key idea: Make the sets disjoint. Then we can use the definition of them measure.
We want to construct sets $D_i$ that we can 'subtract' out of the other sets to make the $E_i$ sequence disjoint.
Let $D_1 = \emptyset$ and $D_i = \bigcup^i_{k=1} E_k$
Then $E_1 \cup \cdots \cup E_n = E_1 \backslash D_1 \cup \cdots \cup E_n \backslash D_n$ since each $D_i$ only takes out the part that has already been included in the union.
Thus,
$$\mu\left( \bigcup_{k=1}^\infty E_k \right) = \mu\left( \bigcup_{k=1}^\infty E_k \backslash D_k \right) \leq \sum_{k=1}^\infty \mu(E_k)$$
since $\mu(D_i) \geq 0$
## Continuity of measure
1. Increasing union version:
  For sequence of sets $E_1 \subseteq E_2 \subseteq \cdots \in \mathcal{S}$ (an increasing sequence of sets)
$$\mu\left( \bigcup^\infty_{k=1} E_k \right) = \lim_{k\to \infty} \mu(E_k) $$

2. Decreasing intersection version:
  For sequence of sets $E_1 \supseteq E_2 \supseteq \cdots \in \mathcal{S}$ (an decreasing sequence of sets) and $\mu(E_i) < \infty$
$$\mu\left( \bigcap^\infty_{k=1} E_k \right) = \lim_{k\to \infty} \mu(E_k) $$

### Proof
1. Since each set is a superset of the previous, we can 'make' them all disjoint.
WLOG, let $E_0 = \emptyset$ so the $E_1 \backslash E_0 = E_1$
   Then
$$ \bigcup^\infty_{k=1} E_k = \bigcup^\infty_{k=1} E_k \backslash E_{k-1} $$ 
which is a disjoint union.

Thus,

$$
\begin{align*}
\mu\left( \bigcup^\infty_{k=1} E_k \right) &= \mu\left(\bigcup^\infty_{k=1} E_k \backslash E_{k-1} \right)\\
&= \sum_{j=1}^\infty \mu(E_j \backslash E_{j-1})\\
&=\lim_{k\to \infty} \sum_{j=1}^k \mu(E_j \backslash E_{j-1})\\
&=\lim_{k\to \infty} \sum_{j=1}^k \mu(E_j) - \mu( E_{j-1})\\
&=\lim_{k\to \infty} \mu(E_k)\\
\end{align*}
$$

2. This one depends on [[20231218112351-de_morgan_s_law|De Morgan's law]] and then uses 1.
