---
title: vector bundle
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
---
# vector bundle 
Informally, a vector bundle is a collection of vector spaces that lie above each point in a manifold. 
They really would have been better named vector space bundle... but oh well. 
We attach a vector space to each point $x \in M$ for some [[20231222094707-smooth_manifold|smooth manifold]], [[202403052130|topological manifold]], or even an abstract [[20231220133911-topology|topological space]]. 

# Formal definition
Note the definition here is for a smooth manifold, but this same construction can be used for other categories.
A vector bundle is the data $(E,M,\pi, k)$, for $E, M$ smooth manifolds with a smooth map 
$$ \pi: E \longrightarrow M,$$
such that for every point $p \in M$, there exists an open neighborhood $U \subset M$ and a smooth map 
$$\varphi:\pi^{-1}(U) \longrightarrow U \times \mathbb{R}^k$$
such that 

1. 
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
\pi^{-1}(U) \arrow[rr, "\varphi"] \arrow{dr}[left]{ \pi\big|_{\pi^{-1}(U)}} & {} & U \times \mathbb{R}^k \arrow[dl, "\sigma"] \\
& U &
\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```

commutes. 
So we want points in the vector bundle above the open set and in $U \times \mathbb{R}^k$ to get mapped to each other. 
Basically, we understand the vector bundle using $U \times \mathbb{R}^k$ since we know what that looks like. 

2. $\forall p \in M$, 
$$\varphi\big|_{\pi^{-1}(\{p\})}:\pi^{-1}\big(\{p\}\big) \longrightarrow \sigma^{-1}\big(\{p\}\big) = \{p\}\times \mathbb{R}^k$$
is a vector space isomorphism. 
So we can think of the vector space attached to a point as being just $\mathbb{R}^k$. 

# Morphisms
Given two smooth manifolds $M$ and $M^\prime$ that both have vector bundles $E$ and $E^\prime$ respectively along with a smooth map $f:M \to M^\prime$, a **vector bundle morphism** is a map $F:E \to E^\prime$ such that the following diagram commutes: 
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
E \arrow[r, "F"] \arrow[d, "\pi_1"] & E^\prime \arrow[d, "\pi_2"]\\
M \arrow[r, "f"] & M^\prime

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```

## Isomorphisms
Obviously, an isomorphims of vector bundles is a morphism with an inverse morphism, but in this case a bijective morphims is sufficient to be an isomorphism. 

# Subbundles
Given a vector bundle $\pi:E \to M$, a subbundle is a vector bundle $\pi_D:D \to M$ such that 
1. $\pi_D = \pi|_D$ 
2. The subset $D_p = D \cap E_p$ is a linear subspace for each $p\in M$
3. The vector space structure of $D_p$ is inherited from $E_p$ as a subspace.

Since we require $D$ to be a vector bundle, all the fibers $\pi_D^{-1}(p)$ must be non-empty and all have the same dimension.

---
# References
[[@lee2013]] - Chapter 10
