---
title: Lie group representation
draft: false
tags:
---
# Overview
A Lie group representation is a special case of a [[202407101429|group representation]]. 

# Definition
There are two ways to define/ think about Lie group representations. 
## Group action perspective
A **representation** of a [[202405061454|Lie group]] $G$ on a vector space $V$ is a continuous action 

$$\Phi:G \times V \longrightarrow V$$

such that for a fixed $g$, the map 

$$
\begin{split}
\varphi_g:V & \longrightarrow V\\
v &\longmapsto \Phi(g, v) = g\cdot v
\end{split}
$$

is linear.
## Group homomorphims perspective
Another perspective is that a **representation** is a smooth group homomorphism 

$$\Phi:G \longrightarrow \text{GL}(V).$$

# Morphisms
For representations $V$ and $W$, a **morphism** is a linear map $f:V\to W$ that is [[202405231417|equivariant]], i.e.

$$f(g \cdot v) = g\cdot f(v) \qquad \forall g \in G, v \in V.$$

We denote the set of all morphisms $\text{Hom}_G(V, W)$. 

Note $\text{Hom}_G(V, W) \subset \text{Hom}(V, W)$ is a linear subspace. 

# Subrepresentations 
For a representation $G \to V$, a linear subspace $U \subset V$ is a **subrepresentation** if it is $G$-invariant. 
That is if

$$g\cdot u \in U \qquad \forall g \in G,u \in U.$$

# Why is a representation a "module"?
#todo 

# Building new representations from old ones
Given a Lie group with representations $V$ and $W$, we can use algebraic constructions to build new representations. 

## Direct sum
$V \oplus W$ is a representation with action $g(v, w) = (gv, gw)$ 

If both are matrix representations, with matrices $g \mapsto A(g)$ and $g \mapsto B(g)$ then the new matrix representation will be the matrix 

$$
g \longmapsto \begin{bmatrix} A(g) & 0 \\
0 & B(g) \end{bmatrix}
$$

## Tensor product
The [[20240103134157-tensor_product|tensor product]] of two representations gives a representation:

$$
g(v \otimes w) = gv \otimes gw.
$$

In explicit matrix forms:
... do this in a sec.

## Morphims between representations
$G$ acts on $\text{Hom}(V, W)$ by 

$$
(g \cdot f)(v) = g\bullet_W f(g^{-1}\bullet_V v).
$$

This gives the following diagram
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
V \arrow[r, "f"] \arrow[d, "g\cdot_V"]& W \arrow[d, "g \cdot_W"] \\
V \arrow[r, dashrightarrow, "g \cdot f"] & W

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```


Note that if $W = \mathbb{C}$ (or $\mathbb{R}$ depending on base field) and the action of $G$ on $\mathbb{C}$ is trivial we get the **dual representation**

$$
\big(g \cdot \varphi\big)(v) = g \cdot \varphi\big(g^{-1}(v)\big) = \varphi(g^{-1}(V)) \qquad \forall \varphi \in V^*, g \in G
$$
