---
title: affine algebraic variety
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
aliases:
  - affine variety
---
# affine algebraic variety
An affine algebraic variety is (informally and loosely) a very special collection of solutions to polynomials. 
Generally, we want to study these geometrically and algebraically to understand the polynomial or the set of solutions. 

## Short formal definition
An affine algebraic variety is an [[202404171121|affine algebraic set]] $V(I)$ such that the ideal of polynomials $I$ that defines (generates) it is [[202404301418|prime]]. 

This definition helps me see that we really are just looking at sets of solutions. 
## Longer formal definition
An affine algebraic variety is a pair $(X, \mathbb{C}[X])$ where 
- $X$ is a [[20231220133911-topology|topological space]]
- $\mathbb{C}[X] \subseteq C^0(X, \mathbb{C})$ is a sub-algebra of the continuous maps to $\mathbb{C}$ 
that satisfy the following property. 
There exists $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$, an [[202404162353|algebra ideal]] $I \subseteq \mathbb{C}[x_1, x_2, \dots, x_n]$, and a [[20231222092807-homeomorphism|homeomorphism]] (using the [[202404171515|Zariski topology]]) $f:X \to V(I)$ such that 
$$ f^*(\mathbb{C}[V(I)]) = \mathbb{C}[X] $$

Note: $\mathbb{C}[V(I)] = \{f|_{V(I)} \ | \ f \in \mathbb{C}[x_1, \dots, x_n]\}$. In other words, its is the polynomials in $n$ variables restricted to the vanishing locus. 

This is a little more "coordinate free" since we just need to be able to have a space that is homeomorphic to the affine algebraic set and a subset of the functions that pull back to polynomials. 

## Morphism of affine algebraic varieties
For affine varieties $X$ and $Y$, a map $f: X \to Y$ is a **morphism** if 
1. $f$ is continuous
2. $$ f^*(\mathbb{C}[Y]) \subseteq \mathbb{C}[X] $$
### Notes on morphisms
An **isomorphism** is a morphism with an inverse morphisms. 
It is not enough to just check that the morphism is a bijection. 

If $f:X\to Y$ is a morphism, the we may restrict $f^*$ to an algebra homomorphism 
$$ f^*:\mathbb{C}[Y] \longrightarrow \mathbb{C}[X]$$


# Coincidence of affine variety structures
For a set $X$ with two affine algebraic variety structures $X_{1}$ and $X_{2}$, the two structures coincide if and only if the identity map $id:X_{1} \to X_{2}$ is an isomorphism.

### Proof
First assume the affine algebraic variety structures are the same.
This means, $\mathbb{C}[X_{1}] = \mathbb{C}[X_{2}]$.
Thus, if we look at the identity map

$$
\begin{split} id:X \to X \\
  x \mapsto x
  \end{split}
$$

Then we can see that the pullback map

$$
\begin{split}
  id^{*}: C^{0}(X, \mathbb{C}) &\to C^{0}(X, \mathbb{C}) \\
  \phi &\mapsto \phi \circ id = \phi
		 \end{split}
$$

is an isomorphism because

$$
\begin{split}
  id^{*}(\mathbb{C}[X_{1}]) = \mathbb{C}[X_{1}] = \mathbb{C}[X_{2}] \subseteq \mathbb{C}[X_{2}] \\
  id^{*}(\mathbb{C}[X_{2}]) = \mathbb{C}[X_{2}] = \mathbb{C}[X_{1}] \subseteq \mathbb{C}[X_{1}]
  \end{split}
$$

Next, if we assume $id:X_{1}\to X_{2}$ is an isomorphism then we know from class that the restriction

$$
id^{*}:\mathbb{C}[X_{2}] \to \mathbb{C}[X_{1}]
$$

is an algebra isomorphism.

Thus, $\mathbb{C}[X_{1}]$ and $\mathbb{C}[X_{2}]$ are the same.
# Examples 
- Every vector space is an affine algebraic variety as shown [[202406251308|here]]. 