---
title: completely integrable system
draft: false
tags:
 - definition
---
# Informal overview
Integrable systems have applications in mechanics.
Say, for a physical system, you are given a symplectic manifold (that usually means some type of phase space) and a Hamiltonian function $H$.

The goal is usually to understand the "trajectories" of the system, meaning the [[202405081528|integral curves]] of the [[202405231223|Hamiltonian vector field]] (lets call it $X_{H}$), even better is to understand ALL the integral curves and get a picture of the flow $\Phi^{H}$ of $X_{H}$.
Unfortunately, this is usually very hard.

In a special case, if enough conserved quantities can be identified, the flow (as a bunch of differential equations) becomes easier to solve (AKA integrate).
Note that the Hamiltonian function itself is a conserved quantity by design.
$H$ is constant on integral curves of $X_{H}$.
So, if we can find $n-1$ other functions that are also constant along integral curves of $X_{H}$, that are "different" enough functions (here's where the functional independence condition in the second part of the definition comes in),
then we can find a chart that preserves the symplectic form that is MUCH simpler to solve.
This comes with fancy tools like generating functions and [[202406241432|action-angle coordinates]]. 
See [[@abraham2008]] chapter 5.2 for more about the physics. 

# Definition
## On symplectic manifold
Let $(M, \omega)$ be a [[202404062124|symplectic manifold]] of dimension $2n$. 
A completely integrable system is a smooth map

$$ F = (f_{1},\dots, f_{n}):M \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}^{n}$$

where each $f_{i}:M \to \mathbb{R}$ pairwise [[202405281427|Poisson commute]], i.e.

$$ \{f_{i},f_{j}\} = 0 \qquad 1 \leq i,j \leq n$$

and $F:M \to \mathbb{R}^{n}$ is a smooth submersion almost everywhere.
(In other words, the set of regular values is an open, dense subset.)

## On Poisson manifold
The definition for a [[202406241434|Poisson manifold]] $(M, \sigma)$ is almost the same, but instead we need $\frac{1}{2}(\dim M + \text{corank }\sigma)$ Poisson commuting, functionally independent functions. 

# As a maximal Poisson commuting subalgebra
In both the symplectic and Poisson commuting case, we want to define a maximal Poisson-commuting subalgebra of $C^\infty(M)$. 

## Symplectic case
Given a symplectic manifold $(M, \omega)$ with $\dim M = 2n$, there can be at most $n$ Poisson commuting functions that are functionally independent.

### Proof
Suppose there are $m$ smooth functions
$$ f_{1}, \dots, f_{m}:M \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}$$
such that $\{f_{i}, f_{j}\} = 0$.

If we pick any point $p \in M$, we can look at the vector subspace $W \subset T_{p}M$ defined as

$$ W = \text{span}\{(X_{f_{1}})_{p}, \dots, (X_{f_{m}})_{p}\}$$

Where $X_{f_{}{i}}$ denotes the [[202405231223|Hamiltonian vector field]] for the function $f_{i}$.

Looking at the symplectic form on this subspace,
$$ \omega_{p}((X_{f_{i}})_{p}, (X_{f_{j}})_{p}) = \{f_{i}, f_{j}\}(p) = 0.$$

Thus, by linearity of the symplectic form, $\omega_{p}|_{W}$ vanishes, so $W$ is an isotropic subspace.

This means that $\dim W \leq n$.

Next, assume that the functions $\{f_{1}, \dots, f_{m}\}$ are independent.
Thus,
$$ dF_{p}:M \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}^{m}$$
is surjective (almost everywhere).

Note that for the standard basis $\{e_{j}\}$ of $\mathbb{R}^{m}$,
$$ F = f_{1}\cdot e_{1} + \cdots + f_{m}\cdot e_{m}.$$

Using linearity of the differential, we have
$$
\begin{align*}
dF_{p} &= d(f_{1}\cdot e_{1} + \cdots + f_{m}\cdot e_{m}) \\
	   &= d(e_{1} \circ f_{1})_{p} + \cdots + d(e_{m}\circ f_{m})_{p}\\
	   &= de_{1} \circ (df_1)_{p} + \cdots + de_{m}\circ (df_{m})_{p} \\
&= (df_{1})_{p}\cdot e_{1} + \cdots + (df_{m})_{p} \cdot e_{m}
\end{align*}
$$

Written somewhat more clearly,
$$ dF_{p} = \begin{bmatrix}(df_{1})_{p} \\ \vdots \\ (df_{m})_{p}\end{bmatrix}: T_{p}M \to \mathbb{R}^{m}$$
So this can only be surjective if $\{(df_{i})_{p}\}$ is a linearly independent set of $T_{p}^{*}M$.

Since $\omega$ is non-degenerate, we can look at the isomorphism
$$
\begin{split}
  \omega^{\vee}:T_{p}M &\longrightarrow T_{p}^{*}M\\
  v &\longmapsto \omega(v, -)
\end{split}
$$
Note that since $X_{f_{i}}$ are Hamiltonian vector fields,
$$\omega^{\vee}(X_{f_{i}})_{p} = \omega(X_{f_{i}}, - ) = (\iota_{X_{f_{i}}}\omega)_{p} = (df_{i})_{p}$$

So thus, the subspace $\text{span}\{(df_{1})_{p}, \dots, (df_{m})_{p}\} \cong W$, and there can be at most $n$ independent functions.

## Poisson manifold case
Given a Poisson manifold $(M, \sigma)$, there can be at most $\frac{1}{2}(\dim M + \text{corank }\sigma)$ Poisson commuting functions that are functionally independent.

### Proof
By the [[202406250731|Weinstein splitting theorem]], we can pick small enough open sets centered at each point such that

$$\chi(U) = V \times W \subset \mathbb{R}^{2s} \times \mathbb{R}^{k}$$

where $V$ has the symplectic form induced from $\sigma$.

Since $V$ is an open set from a symplectic manifold there can only be $s$ independent functions that Poisson commute on $V$.
$W$ is not symplectic, so we can look for $k$ independent functions that Poisson commute.

Note that we can always include independent Casimir functions, since they Poisson commute with every function, so they will automatically commute with the other $s$ functions already found.
There can only be $k$ other independent functions since $\dim T_{p}W = k$.

Thus, there can be $\frac{1}{2}\dim V + \dim W = \frac{1}{2}(\dim M + \text{corank } \sigma)$ functions (for the largest dimension [[202406250734|symplectic leaf]]).

# Cool things
- There is a relationship between certain Hamiltonian torus actions and completely integrable systems shown [[202406241439|here]]. 

