---
title: skeleton
draft: false
tags:
 - definition
---
Given a [[202409161019|category]] $\mathcal{C}$, a skeleton is a subcategory that is equivalent to $\mathcal{C}$ but has no "redundant" objects. 
You can think of a skeleton as the most "economical" model for the category $\mathcal{C}$. 

# Definition
A **skeleton** of a category $\mathcal{C}$ is a subcategory $\mathcal{S}$ for which each object in $\mathcal{C}$ is isomorphic to exactly one object in $\mathcal{S}$ and the canonical inclusion [[202409162145|functor]] 
$$
i:\mathcal{S} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}
$$
is [[202409171519|fully]] [[202409171523|faithful]]. 

Note, by [[202409162212#^3f61ac|this lemma]] $\mathcal{S}$ and $\mathcal{C}$ are equivalent. 

# Existence of skeleton
Every category has a skeleton. 
This is because we can define equivalence classes on $\text{ob}(\mathcal{C})$ using isomorphism of objects (which defines an equivalence relation by [[202409162208#Properties of isomorphisms|this]]).

Then for each equivalence class choose a representative (using the Axiom of Choice and a few other intense details). 

Using these representatives, take all the morphism from $\mathcal{C}$ between those objects to ensure that $i:\mathcal{S} \to \mathcal{C}$ is fully faithful looking at morphisms between objects in $\mathcal{S}$. 

# Examples
- $\text{Set}_0^{\text{fin}}$ (the finite sets of natural numbers $\{1, \dots, n\}$ is a skeleton of $\text{Set}^{\text{fin}}$ (finite sets). 

- $\text{vect}_{k,0}^{\text{fin}}$ is a skeleton of $\text{vect}^{\text{fin}}_k$ 

# Equivalence using skeletons
Let $\mathcal{C}_1, \mathcal{C}_2$ be categories with skeletons $\mathcal{S}_1, \mathcal{S}_2$. 
Then $\mathcal{C}_1$ and $\mathcal{C}_2$ are equivalent if and only if $\mathcal{S}_1$ and $\mathcal{S}_2$ are isomorphic (i.e. equivalent with only identity natural isomorphisms). 

## Remark
This means that if you are only using skeletal categories (those that no two items are isomorphic to each other) then you can use a more naive notion of equivalence without quasi-inverses. 
However, most (interesting) categories aren't skeletal. 
## Proof
#todo 