---
title: module over ring
draft: false
tags:
 - definition
aliases:
 - module
---
# Definition
For a [[202404171457|ring]] $R$, a **(left) $R$-module** is a left-action of a ring $R$ on an [[202407080915|abelian group]] $M$. 
This is a homomorphism of rings
$$
\sigma:R \longrightarrow \text{End}_{\text{Ab}}(M).
$$

Right $R$-modules can be defined analogously. 

For a commutative ring, the right and left notion is not needed. 
## Alternate definition
It can be proved that the above definition is equivalent to the existence of a function 
$$
\rho:R \times M \longrightarrow M
$$
satisfying the requirements below:
- $\rho(r, m+n) = \rho(r,m) + \rho(r,n)$

- $\rho(r + s, m) = \rho(r,m) + \rho(s,m)$ 

- $\rho(rs, m) = \rho(r, \rho(s,m))$ 

- $\rho(1, m) = m$

## Notation
Often the $\rho$ in the definition above is dropped and $\rho(r,m)$ is denoted $rm$. 

# As a category
The modules over a ring $R$ make a [[202409161019|category]] denoted $R\text{-Mod}$.

_Objects_: $R$-modules, that is abelian groups $M$ along with the homomorphism $R \to \text{End}_{\text{Ab}}(M)$ as defined above. 

_Morphisms_: A homomorphism of $R$-modules is a [[202404301514|group homomorphism]] $\varphi:M \to N$ such that 
- $\varphi(m_1 + m_2) = \varphi(m_1) + \varphi(m_2)$ for all $m_1, m_2 \in M$ 

- $\varphi(rm) = r\varphi(m)$ for all $m \in M, r \in R$. 

Composition is defined as composition of group homomorphisms. 

# Submodules
A **submodule** $N \subset M$ (of a $R$-module $M$) is a subgroup that is preserved by the action of $R$. 
That is, 
$$
rn \in N \qquad \forall r \in R, n \in N
$$

In this way, $N$ is an $R$-module itself and the inclusion 
$$
N \hookrightarrow M
$$
is a $R$-module homomorphism. 
# Examples
If $R = k$ for some [[202404171508|field]] $k$, then an $R$-module is a vector space (which defines it's own category). 


Every abelian group is a $\mathbb{Z}$-module. 