---
title: Lie derivative
draft: false
tags:
 - definition
---
# Motivation and intuition
The plain, vanilla directional derivative is great!
It tells us the rate of change of a function in any direction (given as a vector $v$).
However, if we use the "normal" definition of directional derivative
$$ D_{\vec{v}}f(p) = \lim_{t\to 0} \frac{f(p + t\vec{v}) - f(p)}{t}$$
we run into a problem very quickly.
What if $p + t\vec{v}$ isn't on the manifold?
Then the entire difference doesn't make a lot of sense.
Thus, we can improve on this definition using [[202405081538|flows]]. 

# Formal definition
For all definitions, assume $M$ is a [[20231222094707-smooth_manifold|smooth manifold]]. 
## Functions
For a function $f:M \to \mathbb{R}$ and a [[202404011135|vector field]] the **Lie derivative of $f$ with respect to $X$** is
$$\mathcal{L}_{X}f(p) = \lim_{t \to 0}\frac{f(\Phi^{t}_{X}(p)) - f(p)}{t} = \frac{d}{dt}\bigg|_{t=0}\big[ (f \circ\Phi_X^t)(p)\big]$$
Where $\Phi_{X}^{t}$ is the flow of $X$

This tells us how much the function moves in the "direction" of the vector field.

### Notes
Notice, this doesn't have the pesky issues of not being defined since we can always find a small enough neighborhood for the flow to be defined for a given point $p$.

We can denote $X(f) = \mathcal{L}_{X}f:M \to \mathbb{R}$.

## Vector fields
Given vector fields $X, Y \in \mathfrak{X}(M)$, the **Lie derivative of Y with respect to X** is
$$ (\mathcal{L}_{X}Y)_{p} = \lim_{t\to 0}\frac{(d\Phi_{X}^{-t})_{\Phi_{X}^{t}(p)}(Y_{\Phi_{X}^{t}(p)} )- Y_{p}}{t} = \frac{d}{dt}\bigg|_{t=0}\big[ d(\Phi_X^{-t})_{\Phi_X^t(p)}(Y_{\Phi_X^t(p)})\big]$$

### Notes
Looking at the naive case shows why this definition is important. 
If we are working with a manifold $\mathbb{R}^{n}$, then $T_{p}\mathbb{R}^{n} \cong \mathbb{R}^{n}$.
So we can look at a type of directional derivative of a vector field $X \in \mathfrak{X}(\mathbb{R}^{n})$.
$$ \lim_{t\to 0} \frac{X_{p + t\vec{v}} - X_{p}}{t}$$

But again, the tangent spaces at different points on a manifold do not always turn out to be the exact same. 
Using the [[202403092121|differential]] of the flow gives a way to move the tangent vectors at different points into the same vector space.

### Everywhere defined
For a smooth manifold $M$ and vector spaces $X,Y \in \mathfrak{X}(M)$, the Lie derivative $(\mathcal{L}_{X}Y)_{p}$ is defined for every point $p \in M$ and $\mathcal{L}_{X}Y$ is a smooth vector field.

#### Proof 
#todo 

### Connection to Lie theory
The Lie derivative for vector fields is equivalent to the [[202405062213|Lie bracket]] on the Lie algebra of vector fields on M.
I.e. 
$$\mathcal{L}_V W = [V, W]$$
## Tensor fields
For a smooth manifold $M$, $X \in \mathfrak{X}(M)$ and a smooth covariant [[202405230013|tensor field]],  $A$ (i.e. $A_{p}:T_{p}M \times \cdots \times T_{p}M \to \mathbb{R}$), the **Lie derivative of $A$ with respect to $X$** is
$$ (\mathcal{L}_{X}A)_p = \lim_{t\to 0}\frac{(d\Phi_{X}^{t})^{*}_{p}(A_{\Phi_{X}^{t}(p)}) - A_{p}}{t} = \frac{d}{dt}\bigg|_{t=0}({\Phi_X^t}^* A)_p$$

In general, this is pretty difficult to use as is.
Instead, for [[202404061628|differential forms]] we can use [[202405222350|Cartan's magic formula]]: 
$$ \mathcal{L}_{X}\alpha = d\iota_{X}\alpha + \iota_{X}d\alpha.$$
