---
title: vector space as an affine variety
draft: false
tags:
---

# Overview
Every vector space has a canonical [[202404301434|affine algebraic variety]] structure. 
This makes sense intuitively since (informally) each vector space is somehow linear... and thus affine. 

# Affine algebraic variety structure
Let $V$ be a finite-dimensional vector space. Given an ordered basis $\beta$ of $V$, consider the vector space isomorphism
$$[-]_{\beta}:V\longrightarrow\mathbb{C}^{\dim V},\quad v\mapsto[v]_{\beta}.$$
The set $V$ has a unique affine algebraic variety structure that makes $[-]_{\beta}$ an isomorphism of affine algebraic varieties for all ordered bases $\beta$ of $V$.

## Proof
Throughout this proof, to make things easier to write, assume $\dim V = n$ for some $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 1}$.

In order to prove the statement above, we can show that we can put an affine algebraic variety structure on V, then we must show that it is unique.

### Existence of affine variety structure
To give V an affine algebraic variety structure, first we need to make sure $[-]_{\beta}:V \to \mathbb{C}^{n}$ is a homeomorphism.
Therefore, for every closed set $U \in \mathbb{C}^{n}$, let $[-]_{\beta}^{-1}(U)$ be a closed subset of $V$.

Now, we need to define $\mathbb{C}[V]$.
Since we have a bijection between $\mathbb{C}^{n}$ and $V$, we can use that to build $\mathbb{C}[V]$.

For $\phi \in \mathbb{C}[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}]$ let $\tilde{\phi} \in \mathbb{C}[V]$ be defined as the map $\phi \circ [-]_{\beta}$.

Therefore, we have the pair $(V, \mathbb{C}[V])$ such that $\mathbb{C}[V] \subseteq \mathbb{C}^{0}(V, \mathbb{C})$ and

$$
[-]_{\beta}:V \to V(\{0\}) = \mathbb{C}^{n} 
$$

where
$$ [-]_{\beta}^{*}(\mathbb{C}[V(I)]) = [-]_{\beta}^{*}(\mathbb{C}[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}]) = \mathbb{C}[V].$$

This means $V$ has an affine algebraic variety structure.

### Uniqueness 
Using this [[202404301434#Coincidence of affine variety structures|lemma]], given two ordered basis $\beta$ and $\gamma$ for V, it suffices to show that $id:V_{\beta} \to V_{\gamma}$ is an isomorphism where $V_{\beta}$ denotes the affine algebraic variety structure inherited from $\beta$.

We can illustrate this with the commutative diagram below:
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
  V_{\beta} \arrow{r}[above]{id} \arrow{d}[left]{[-]_{\beta}} & V_{\gamma} \arrow{d}[right]{[-]_{\gamma}}\\
\mathbb{C}^{n} \arrow{r}[below]{[-]_{\gamma} \circ [-]^{-1}_{\beta}}& \mathbb{C}^{n}
\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```

We know that the diagram commutes, therefore
$$id = [-]_{\gamma}^{-1} \circ \bigg([-]_{\gamma} \circ [-]^{-1}_{\beta}\bigg) \circ [-]_{\beta}.$$

We know by construction that $[-]_{\beta}$ and $[-]_{\gamma}$ are isomorphisms.
However, we need to show that the middle term $[-]_{\gamma} \circ [-]^{-1}_{\beta}$ is an isomorphism.
It is apparent that it is a vector space isomorphism, but not that it is a morphism of affine algebraic varieties.

---

**Lemma**
For $A \in Mat_{m\times n}(\mathbb{C})$ the map
$$\begin{split}
	\varphi:\mathbb{C}^{m} &\to \mathbb{C}^{n} \\
	z &\mapsto Az \end{split}$$
is a morphism of affine algebraic varieties.

**Proof**
Fix $i \in \{1, \dots, m\}$.
$$
\begin{align*}
\big(\varphi^{*}(x_{i})\big)(z_{1}, \dots, z_{n}) &= x_{i}\big(\varphi(z_{1}, \dots, z_{n})\big) \\
&= x_{i}\bigg( A\begin{bmatrix} z_{1} \\ \vdots \\ z_{n} \end{bmatrix} \bigg) \\
&= \sum_{k =1}^{n} a_{ik}z_{k} \qquad \text{ the ith entry of } A\vec{z}\\
&= a_{i1}z_{1} + \dots + a_{in}z_{n} \\
&= (a_{i1}x_{1} + \dots + a_{in}x_{n})(z_{1}, \dots, z_{n})
\end{align*}
$$
Therefore
$$ \varphi^{*}(x_{i}) = a_{i1}x_{1} + \dots + a_{in}x_{n} \in \mathbb{C}[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}]$$
  
Now for an arbitrary $f \in \mathbb{C}[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}]$,
$$
f = \sum_{I = (i_{1}, \dots, i_{n})} a_{I}x_{1}^{i_{1}}\cdots x_{n}^{i_{n}}
$$

Since we know that $\varphi^{*}$ is an algebra homomorphism,
$$
	\varphi^{*}(f) = \sum_{I = (i_{1}, \dots, i_{n})} a_{I}\varphi^{*}(x_{1}^{i_{1}})\cdots \varphi^{*}(x_{n}^{i_{n}}
)$$

which is a product of polynomials, and is thus a polynomials.
Stated another way, $\varphi^{*}(f) \in \mathbb{C}[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}]$.

Now the only thing that remains is to prove that $\varphi$ is continuous.

Let $Z \subseteq \mathbb{C}^{n}$ be closed.
Thus
$$ \begin{split}
   Z &= V(f_{1}, \dots, f_{k}) \qquad \text{ for } f_{i} \in \mathbb{C}[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}] \\
   &= \{z \in \mathbb{C}^{n} \ \big| \ f_{1}(z) = \cdots = f_{k}(z) = 0\}
\end{split}$$

Consider the preimage of the set $Z$:
$$
\begin{align*}
\varphi^{-1}\big(Z\big) = \varphi^{-1}\big(V(f_{1}, \dots, f_{k})\big) &= \{z \in \mathbb{C}^{n} \big| \varphi(z) \in V(f_{1}, \dots, f_{k}) \}\\
&= \{z \in \mathbb{C}^{n} \big| f_{1}(\varphi(z)) = \cdots = f_{n}(\varphi(z)) = 0 \}\\
&= \{z \in \mathbb{C}^{n} \big| \big(\varphi^{*}(f_{1})\big)(z) = \cdots = \big(\varphi^{*}(f_{n})\big)(z) = 0 \}\\
&= V\big(\varphi^{*}(f_{1}), \dots, \varphi^{*}(f_{k})\big) \\
&= V\big(\big\langle\varphi^{*}(f_{1}), \dots, \varphi^{*}(f_{k})\big\rangle\big) \\
\end{align*}
$$

Thus $\varphi^{-1}(Z)$ is closed in $\mathbb{C}^{n}$ and $\varphi$ is continuous.

With both of these conditions, the map $\varphi$ which is left multiplication by a matrix is a morphism.

---

By this lemma, $[-]_{\gamma} \circ [-]^{-1}_{\beta}$ is a morphism because it can be written as the matrix representing the change of basis.
Thus, $id:V_{\beta} \to V_{\gamma}$ is a composition of morphisms so it must be a morphism.
Note this same process can be done with $id:V_{\gamma} \to V_{\beta}$, so $id$ is a morphism with an inverse morphism so it is an isomorphism.
By the first lemma, for any choice of ordered basis on $V$ the two affine algebraic variety structures are the same.

# Linear maps are morphisms

Suppose that $W$ is another finite-dimensional vector space. Equip the sets $V$ and $W$ with the affine algebraic variety structures resulting from Part (i), and let $\varphi:V\longrightarrow W$ be a linear map. Prove that $\varphi$ is a morphism of affine algebraic varieties.



For simplicity let $\dim W = m$.

Finite dimensional vector spaces are isomorphic to $\mathbb{C}^{n}$.
Thus, we know we can find a matrix representation of $\varphi$ such that the following diagram commutes for a given choice of ordered basis $\gamma$ for W.
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
  V \arrow{r}[above]{\varphi} \arrow{d}[left]{[-]_{\beta}} & W \arrow{d}[right]{[-]_{\gamma}}\\
\mathbb{C}^{n} \arrow{r}[below]{[\varphi]}& \mathbb{C}^{m}

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```


Therefore, we see that the function can be written as
$$
  \varphi = [-]^{-1}_{\gamma} \circ [\varphi] \circ [-]_{\beta}.
$$

Similarly to above, we know that $[-]_{\beta}$ and $[-]_{\gamma}$ are isomorphism by construction.
By the lemma above, we know that the map for left multplication by a matrix (in this case $[\varphi]$) is a morphism, thus $\varphi$ is a composition of morphism and thus is a morphism.