---
title: singular homology
draft: false
tags:
 - definition
---
# Overview
The [[202406180947|fundamental group]] works well to identify "holes" of low dimension, but it doesn't work well for "bigger" holes. 
Instead we can use continuous maps from a [[202407061455|simplex]] to the topological space.
The goal is to use [[202407080925|homological algebra]] on a [[202407080919|chain complex]] of groups of these continuous maps. 
To do so, we need a little bit of work to get the necessary parts. 
# Necessary prerequisite constructions
## Singular simplices
Let $X$ be a [[20231220133911-topology|topological space]]. 
A **(singular) n-simplex in X** is a continuous map 

$$
\sigma:\Delta^n \longrightarrow X
$$

where $\Delta^n$ is a n-[[202407061455|simplex]].

Note the terminology of the word _singular_ is meant to show that this might not be an embedding. 
It is only a continuous map, so the image might not "look" like a simplex, certain singularities are allowed ([[@hatcher2002]]). 

Let $\text{Sing}_n(X)$ be the set of all singular n-simplices in $X$. 


> [!NOTE]- Singular n-simplex in X for small n
>$$\text{Sing}_0(X) \simeq X \qquad \text{bijectively}$$
>
>$$\text{Sing}_1(X) = \{\text{paths in }X\}$$

The $i$th face map $d^i:\Delta^{n-1} \to \Delta^n$ induces a function

$$
\begin{split}
\partial_i:\text{Sing}_n(X) &\longrightarrow \text{Sing}_{n+1}(X)\\
\sigma & \longmapsto \sigma \circ d^i
\end{split}
$$
## Singular chains
Now we want to build a [[202407080919|chain complex]] using $\text{Sing}_n(X)$. 

The [[202403172230|free abelian group]] on $\text{Sing}_n(X)$ is called the **group of (singular) n-chains on $X$**. 
It is denoted $C_n(X)$.

Since $C_n(X)$ is a free abelian group with $\text{Sing}_n(X)$ as a basis, we can write $\sigma \in C_n(X)$ uniquely as the finite sum

$$
\sigma = \sum_{\sigma_i \in \text{Sing}_n(X)} a_i\sigma_i \qquad  a_i \in \mathbb{Z}.
$$

We set $C_n(X) = 0$ for $n \leq -1$. 

In order to make the boundary map for the chain complex, we can use the one from $\text{Sing}_n(X)$. 
Using the [[202403172230#Universal property|universal property of free groups]] since there is a map 

$$
\text{Sing}_n(X) \xrightarrow{\partial_i} \text{Sing}_{n-1}(X) \hookrightarrow C_{n-1}(X)
$$

we can build a unique group homomorphism 

$$
C_n(X) \longrightarrow C_{n-1}(X)
$$

that respects the boundary map. 
This is shown in this diagram:

```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
\textup{Sing}_n(X) \arrow[d] \arrow[r, "\partial_i"] & \textup{Sing}_{n-1}(X) \arrow[d] \\
C_n(X) \arrow[r, dashrightarrow, "\partial_i"] & C_{n-1}(X)
\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```


Explicitly 

$$
\partial_k \sum_j a_j\sigma_j = \sum_j a_j\partial_k\sigma_j.
$$

Collecting these together gives us the **nth boundary operator** 

$$
\begin{split}
\partial: C_n(X) & \longrightarrow C_{n-1}(X)\\
\sigma &\longmapsto \sum(-1)^i\partial_i \sigma
\end{split}
$$

# Singular homology
Now that we have the chain complex $C_\bullet(X)$, we can define the singular homology. 

The group of **singular n-cycles** in $X$ is 

$$
Z_n(X) = \ker(\partial:C_n(X) \longrightarrow C_{n-1}(X)) \trianglelefteq C_n(X)
$$

The group of **singular n-boundaries** in $X$ is 

$$
B_n(X) = \text{im}\big(\partial:C_{n+1}(X) \longrightarrow C_n(X)\big) \trianglelefteq C_n(X)
$$

The **nth singular homology** of $X$ is the group 

$$
H_n(X) = Z_n(X) \bigg/ B_n(X).
$$

# Important properties
## Induced chain map
A continuous function $f:X \to Y$ induces a chain map 

$$
C_\bullet(f) :C_\bullet(X) \longrightarrow C_\bullet(Y).
$$

Moreover, 

$$
C_\bullet(f \circ g) = C_\bullet(f) \circ C_\bullet(g)
$$

and 

$$
C_\bullet(id_X) = id_{C_\bullet(X)}.
$$

If $f$ is a [[20231222092807-homeomorphism|homeomorphism]], then 

$$
H_\bullet (f) : H_\bullet(X) \xrightarrow{\sim} H_\bullet(Y) .
$$

### Proof
#todo 

## 0th homology
Let $X$ be a topological space. 
Then the 0th homology group is the free abelian group of path components of $X$. 


$$
H_0(X) \simeq \mathbb{Z}\pi_0(X) = \left({\prod_{\alpha \in \pi_0(x)}}^* \mathbb{Z}_\alpha\right)_{ab}
$$

### Proof
#todo 

# Resources
- [[@hatcher2002]] - Chapter 2