---
title: closed subgroup theorem
draft: false
tags:
---
# Closed subgroup theorem
The closed subgroup theorem is an important theorem in Lie theory because it gives us a way to "make" a lot of new and interesting [[202405061454|Lie groups]] from known existing ones. 

# Statement
For a [[202405061454|Lie group]] $G$, let $H \subset G$ be a (topologically) closed subgroup. 
Then $H$ is an embedded submanifold and therefore is a Lie subgroup. 

## Proof
The main goal for me walking through this proof was to understand the need for the closed condition in the hypothesis.

The TL;DR is that we can build a nice identification for the tangent space of $H$ at $e$ (i.e. $Lie(H)$) taking advantage of the closed condition.
Then we can build slice charts using linear maps from $\mathfrak{g}$ to this tangent space.
Lastly, since $L_{g}$ is a diffeomorphism, we can translate these slice charts around to get slice charts for all of $H$.

There are a few lemmas needed:

> [!NOTE]+ Lemma
>Let $G$ be a Lie group and let $\mathfrak{g}$ be its Lie algebra.
>For $X, Y \in \mathfrak{g}$,
>$$
>\lim_{n\to\infty}\left( \bigg( \exp \frac{t}{n}X \bigg) \bigg( \exp \frac{t}{n} Y\bigg)\right) = \exp t(X + Y)
>$$

  > [!NOTE]+ Lemma
  Let $G$ be a Lie group and suppose $A, B \subseteq \mathfrak{g}$ are complementary linear subspaces of $Lie(G)$.
  The map
>$$
>\begin{split}
> A \oplus B & \longrightarrow G \\
> (X, Y) &\longmapsto \exp X \exp Y
>\end{split}
>$$
>is a diffeomorphism from some neighborhood of $(0,0)$ in $A \oplus B$ to a neighborhood of $e \in G$.

Let $\mathfrak{h} \subset \mathfrak{g}$ defined by
$$\mathfrak{h}= \{X \in \mathfrak{g} \ \big| \ \exp tX \in H \quad \forall t \in \mathbb{R} \}.$$

It turns out this is the Lie algebra of $H$, but that isn't necessary knowledge for the proof and it remains to be proven.

First, we claim $\mathfrak{h}$ is a linear subspace of $\mathfrak{g}$.
Let $X \in \mathfrak{h}$, then for each $c,t \in \mathbb{R}$, we know $ct \in \mathbb{R}$ thus, $ctX \in H$, so $\mathfrak{h}$ is closed under scalar multiplication.

Next, for $X, Y \in \mathfrak{h}$, by the first lemma above

$$
 \exp t(X + Y) = \lim_{n\to\infty}\left( \bigg( \exp \frac{t}{n}X \bigg) \bigg( \exp \frac{t}{n} Y\bigg)\right) \in H
$$
since $H$ is a closed subgroup of $G$.

Now using this subspace, we want to show that there exists a neighborhood $U\subset \mathfrak{g}$ for which the exponential map is a diffeomorphism and
$$\exp(U \cap \mathfrak{h}) = (\exp U) \cap H.$$

Then, consider any linear isomorphism $T:\mathfrak{g} \to \mathbb{R}^{n}$ such that $T\big|_{\mathfrak{h}}:\mathfrak{h} \to \mathbb{R}^{k}$ is an isomorphism.
We know this exists since $\mathfrak{h}$ is a linear subspace.
since $\exp$ is a diffeomorphism on $U$, we can construct the map $\varphi = \exp^{-1}\circ T$ as in the following diagram:

```tikz
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\usepackage{tikz-cd}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
  \exp U \arrow[r, "\exp^{-1}"] \arrow[d, phantom, sloped, "\subset"] \arrow[rr, bend right=20,swap, "\varphi"]
  & U \arrow[r, "T"] & \mathbb{R}^n\\
  G&&
\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```


This is pretty obvously smooth, so it is a chart for $G$.
We can look at
$$
\varphi(\exp(U) \cap H) = \varphi(\exp(U \cap \mathfrak{h})) = T(\exp(\exp^{-1}(U \cap \mathfrak{h}))) = T(U \cap \mathfrak{h})
$$
This is a slice chart for $H$ on a neighborhood of $e$ by taking the other $n-k$ variables and setting them to be 0.

The really important part is this is a slice chart on a neighborhood of $e$, so since $L_{h}$ is a diffeomorphism for $h \in H$ then
$$ L_{h}(\exp(U) \cap H)$$
has a smooth slice chart as well.
Thus, $H$ is an embedded submanifold of $G$.

It only remains to show that this special neighborhood $U$ actually exists.
For contradiction assume that no such neighborhood exists.
Equivalently, for every neighborhood $U\subset \mathfrak{g}$ of the origin there exists a vector $v \in U$ such that

$$
  x \in \exp U \cap H \quad \text{and} \quad x \notin \exp(U \cap \mathfrak{h})  \tag{1} \label{cont_condition}
$$

Next let $\mathfrak{b}\subset \mathfrak{g}$ be a subspace such that
$$\mathfrak{g} = \mathfrak{h} \oplus \mathfrak{b}.$$

By the second lemma, there is a some neighborhood of $(0,0)$ such that the map
$$
  \begin{split}
  \Phi:\mathfrak{h} \oplus \mathfrak{b} &\longrightarrow G \\
  (X, Y) &\longmapsto \exp X \exp Y
  \end{split}
$$
is a diffeomorphism.

So now we want to choose neighborhoods $U_{0} \subset \mathfrak{g}$ and $\tilde{U_{0}} \subset \mathfrak{h} \oplus \mathfrak{b}$ (small enough inside the ones described above) such that $\exp\big|_{U_{0}}$ and $\Phi\big|_{\tilde{U_{0}}}$ are diffeomorphisms.

Now consider a countable sequence of neighborhoods $\{U_{i}\} \subset \mathfrak{g}$ of $0$ such that the radius of a ball containing them approaches 0.
Since the radius approaches 0, after a certain index $N$ all $U_{i} \subset U_{0}$ for $i \geq N$.

Now we can use this sequence to construct useful sequences of sets on $G$ and $\mathfrak{h} \oplus \mathfrak{b}$.
Let $V_{i} = \exp(U_{i})$ and since $\Phi$ is diffeomorphic let $\widetilde{U}_{i} = \Phi^{-1}(V_{i})$.
This is shown in the diagram below:

```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
	\{U_i\} \arrow[dr, mapsto] \arrow[r, phantom, "\subset"] & \mathfrak{g} \arrow[dr, "\exp"] \arrow[rr, leftrightarrow]&& \mathfrak{h} \oplus \mathfrak{b} \arrow[dl, swap, "\Phi"]& \{\widetilde{U_i}\} \arrow[l, phantom, "\supset"]\\
	&V_i \arrow[r, phantom, "\subset"]& G& V_i \arrow[ur, mapsto] \arrow[l, phantom, "\supset"]&
\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```

Since the condition in equation $\eqref{cont_condition}$ is for every neighborhood of 0, then for each $U_{i}$ there exists $x_{i} \in G$ such that
$$x_{i} \in \exp U_{i} \cap H \quad \text{and} \quad x_{i} \notin \exp(U_{i} \cap \mathfrak{h})$$
so
$$x_{i} = \exp Z_{i} \qquad \text{for some } Z_{i} \in U_{i}$$
We can rewrite this as
$$x_{i} = \exp X_{i}\exp Y_{i} \qquad \text{for some } (X_{i}, Y_{i}) \in \widetilde{U}_{i}$$

Note if $Y_{i} = 0$  then we would already be done since this would contradict $x_{i} \notin \mathfrak{h}$, so we assume that $Y_{i} \neq 0$.

In order to build a contradiction, we want to build a nonzero element $Y \in \mathfrak{b}$ such that $Y \in \mathfrak{h}$, this would be a contradiction since $\mathfrak{h} \cap \mathfrak{b} = \{0\}$.

Note that since $H$ is a subgroup
$$x_{i} = \exp X_{i} \exp Y_{i} \implies (\exp X_{i})^{-1}x_{i} = \exp Y_{i} \in H$$

Let $|-|$ be a norm on $\mathfrak{b}$
> [!tip]-
I didn't state it, but I'm assuming finite dimensional Lie algebras, so all the norms are equivalent.

Using this norm, consider a convergent subsequence $\{Y_{k}\}$

$$
\frac{Y_{i}}{|Y_{i}|} \to Y \in \mathfrak{b} \quad \text{with } |Y| = 1
$$

which exists since $\frac{Y_{i}}{|Y_{i}|}$ is bounded.

Then for any $t \in \mathbb{R}$, for each $i$ let $n_{i}$ be the greatest integer such that
$$
n_{i} \leq \frac{t}{|Y_{i}|} \implies \left| n_{i} - \frac{t}{|Y_{i}|} \right| \leq 1 \implies |n_{i}|Y_{i}| - t| \leq |Y_{i}| \to 0
$$

By uniqueness of limit, $n_{i}|Y_{i}| \to t$, therefore
$$n_{i}Y_{i} = n_{i}|Y_{i}|\frac{Y_{i}}{|Y_{i}|} \to tY$$

That means that
$$\exp(n_{i}Y_{i}) = (\exp Y_{i})^{n_{i}} \in H$$
because each $\exp(Y_{i}) \in H$.
Since $H$ is closed, it contains all limit points, so $\exp tY \in H$, so this nonzero element that shouldn't exist does.
This is a contraction so we there always exists a neighborhood $U \subset \mathfrak{g}$ such that
$$\exp(U \cap \mathfrak{h}) = (\exp U) \cap H.$$

This completes the proof.
