---
title: quotient manifold theorem
draft: false
tags:
 - definition
---
# Statement
Suppose $G$ is a [[202405061454|Lie group]] with an action on a [[20231222094707-smooth_manifold|smooth manifold]] $M$ that is smooth, [[202405081605|free]], and [[202405201025|proper]]. 
Then the [[202405231437|orbit space]] $M/G$ is a [[202403052130|topological manifold]] of dimension equal to $\dim M - \dim G$, and has a unique structure with the property that the projection map 
$$
\pi:M \to M/G
$$
is a smooth [[202405021547|submersion]]. 

## Proof
The entire proof can be found in [[@lee2013]] on page 544-547. In these notes I only will give a sketch of the proof and why each of the hypotheses are needed.

> [!NOTE]+ Lemma 1
>Let $M$ be a manifold and let $G$ be a Lie group acting continuously and properly on $M$. If $\{p_{i}\}$ is a sequence in $M$ and $\{g_{i}\}$ is a sequence in $G$ such that $\{p_{i}\}$ and $\{g_{i}\cdot p_{i}\}$ converge, then a subsequence of $\{g_{i}\}$ converges.
>
>The proof can be found in [[@lee2013]] on page 543.

>[!NOTE]+ Lemma 2
 >Suppose $G$ is a Lie group that acts smoothly and properly on a smooth manifold $M$. For any point $p\in M$, the orbit map $\varphi_{p}:G \to M$ is a proper map, the orbit $\mathcal{O}_{p}$ is closed in $M$.
>Additionally, if the stabilizer $G_{p} = \{e\}$, then the orbit map is a smooth embedding and the orbit is a properly embedded submanifold.

The main idea of the proof is to show that you can find charts $(\varphi, U)$ centered at $p \in M$,
such that each orbit of the action of $G$ on $M$ intersects $U$ as either the empty set or as a [[202409061219|slice chart]] 
These charts are called **adapted charts** (they are adapted to the $G$ action).

This condition is a sensible thing to want because the orbits are submanifolds by lemma $(2)$.
This would mean that on these coordinate charts the action is limited to moving the first $\dim G$ coordinates.
On the "rest" of the manifold it doesn't do anything as acting by $g \in G$ would just move along the slice chart which is constant in the last $\dim M - \dim G$ coordinates.

To prove that these slice charts exists (though not that the orbits intersect in a single slice) [[@lee2013]] used [[202409061237|Frobenius' Theorem]].
Consider the [[202409061240|distribution]] of tangent spaces to the orbits, i.e.
$$
D = \bigcup_{p \in M} D_{p}, \quad \text{where } D_{p}= T_{p}\mathcal{O}_{p}.
$$

It can be shown that this is [[202409061241|involutive]], so each orbit is a leaf of the resulting foliation, i.e. the orbits are integral submanifolds of the distribution $D$ (somewhat obviously).

Then, we want to show that we can shrink these charts from the foliation small enough, so each orbit only intersects as one slice.
Assuming the opposite for contradiction, we can look at subsets of the open sets from the charts of the foliation centered at $p \in M$ such that the "width" of the open set is less than or equal to $\frac{1}{i}$ in any coordinate direction of the center, $p$.

Since we assumed that each orbit intersects each chart in more than just a single slice, we can pick a sequence of points $p_{i}, p^{\prime}_{i}$ that are in the two different slices of each (increasingly smaller) open subset.
Each open subset obviously shrinks towards the center point $p$, so both $p_{i} \to p$ and $p_{i}^{\prime} \to p$.

Here is where we need the proper assumption, to use lemma 1, we can see that since $p_{i}, p_{i}^{\prime}$ are in the same orbits that

$$
g_{i} \cdot p_{i} = p_{i}^{\prime} \implies \{p_{i}\} \to p, \text{ and } \{g_{i} \cdot p_{i}\} \to p.
$$

Therefore, some subsequence of $\{g_{i}\}$ converges (lets say to $g$), and we can use this subsequence:
$$
g \cdot p = \lim_{i \to \infty} g_{i} \cdot p_{i} = \lim_{i \to \infty}p_{i}^{\prime} = p
$$

And here is where we need the assumption that the action is free, so we know that $g = e$.
This is useful, because we then can use a restricted version of the orbit map, which is a local diffeomorphism (and thus injective) to show that the two points we assumed (for contradiction) were distinct must be the same.

Now that we know these adapted charts exist, we can look at the image under the projection $\pi$, which when using adapted charts has a coordinate representation $\pi(x, y) = y$.
In other words, it throws out the first $\dim G$ coordinates, as that is where the $G$ action "lives".

After this it only remains to show that the new coordinate charts of $M/G$ which come from $\pi$ follow the definition of a manifold, and that $\pi$ is a smooth submersion.
The rest of the proof (and all the details) can be found as cited above.

# Notes
The open sets are easy to understand in $M/G$. 
It is constructed so that $\pi:M \to M/G$ is a [[20240113165510-quotient_map|quotient map]] so in the [[20240113171045-quotient_topology|quotient topology]], a set $V \subset M/G$ is open if $\pi^{-1}(V) \subset M$ is open. 

Also, if $G$ is [[202405201029|compact]], then the proper condition is unnecessary.