---
title: Noetherian ring
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
---
Neotherian rings are important structures that arise in algebraic-geometric settings. 
# Definition
A [[202404171457|ring]] is **left (right) Noetherian** if every left (right) [[202409172306|ideal]] is finitely generated. 
It is called **Noetherian** if it is both left and right Noetherian. Note this is true of any left or right Noetherian ring in the commutative case. 

# Equivalent definition
Let $R$ be a ring. $R$ is (left, right) Noetherian if and only if every chain of (left, right) ideals stabilizes. 
That is, if 
$$
I_1 \subset I_2 \subset \dots \subset R
$$
is a chain of ideals then $I_n = I_{n+1} = \cdots$ for some $n$. 

## Proof
This proof is only for the commutative case, but the same idea applies. 

Consider a chain of ideals
$$
I_1 \subset I_2 \subset \dots
$$

Then $I = \bigcup_{j=1}^\infty I_j$ is an ideal (it's kind of like the limit of the chain of ideals) where $I = (r_1, \dots, r_m)$ for some $r_1, \dots r_m \in R$. 
So there are only $m$ generators to work with so, as soon as $r_1, \dots r_m \in I_n$ then $I_n = I_{n+1}= \dots$ since they all have the same generators. 

Going the other way, assume that $R$ satisfies the ascending chain condition. 
Let $I = (r_1, \dots)$ be an ideal. 
Then we have the chain 
$$
(r_1) \subset (r_1, r_2) \subset \cdots
$$
which stabilizes by assumption, thus after some point adding generators doesn't do anything so $I$ is finitely generated. 
# Interesting related theorem/ ideas 
- [[202409181314|Hilbert Basis Theorem]]
