---
title: affine algebraic variety
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
aliases:
  - affine variety
---
# affine algebraic variety
An affine algebraic variety is (informally and loosely) a very special collection of solutions to polynomials. 
Generally, we want to study these geometrically and algebraically to understand the polynomial or the set of solutions. 

## Short formal definition
An affine algebraic variety is an [[202404171121|affine algebraic set]] $V(I)$ such that the ideal of polynomials $I$ that defines (generates) it is [[202404301418|prime]]. 

This definition helps me see that we really are just looking at sets of solutions. 
## Longer formal definition
An affine algebraic variety is a pair $(X, \mathbb{C}[X])$ where 
- $X$ is a [[20231220133911-topology|topological space]]
- $\mathbb{C}[X] \subseteq C^0(X, \mathbb{C})$ is a sub-algebra of the continuous maps to $\mathbb{C}$ 
that satisfy the following property. 
There exists $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$, an [[202404162353|algebra ideal]] $I \subseteq \mathbb{C}[x_1, x_2, \dots, x_n]$, and a [[20231222092807-homeomorphism|homeomorphism]] (using the [[202404171515|Zariski topology]]) $f:X \to V(I)$ such that 
$$ f^*(\mathbb{C}[V(I)]) = \mathbb{C}[X] $$

Note: $\mathbb{C}[V(I)] = \{f|_{V(I)} \ | \ f \in \mathbb{C}[x_1, \dots, x_n]\}$. In other words, its is the polynomials in $n$ variables restricted to the vanishing locus. 

This is a little more "coordinate free" since we just need to be able to have a space that is homeomorphic to the affine algebraic set and a subset of the functions that pull back to polynomials. 

## Morphism of affine algebraic varieties
For affine varieties $X$ and $Y$, a map $f: X \to Y$ is a **morphism** if 
1. $f$ is continuous
2. $$ f^*(\mathbb{C}[Y]) \subseteq \mathbb{C}[X] $$
### Notes on morphisms
An **isomorphism** is a morphism with an inverse morphisms. 
It is not enough to just check that the morphism is a bijection. 

If $f:X\to Y$ is a morphism, the we may restrict $f^*$ to an algebra homomorphism 
$$ f^*:\mathbb{C}[Y] \longrightarrow \mathbb{C}[X]$$
