---
title: PID modules
draft: false
tags:
status: In progress
---
# Overview
The theory of [[202409301254|modules]] over a [[202409181251|PID]] is very interesting since it is simple enough to understand while giving a feel for deeper ring theory questions. 

PID's show up everywhere and many common examples of modules are over PID's so this is a good place to start anyways. 

Throughout these notes consider a [[202404171457|ring]] $R$ to be a PID.
The main goal (and final theorem) is to classify all modules over $R$. 
# A notion of dimension
Let $M$ be a [[202409302304|free R-module]], and say that $M \cong R^{\oplus X}$ for some finite set $X$. 
The cardinality of $X$ is well-defined (that is if $M \cong R^{\oplus Y}$ then $|X| = |Y|$.) 
Thus, we write $\dim_R M$ for the cardinality of $X$. 

This builds in a canonical way off the idea of dimension for a vector space. 
We know that dimension is invariant for any choice of basis in a vector space, and that it "plays nice" with subspaces, quotienting, etc.
## Proof
#todo 

# Finitely generated submodules
Let $M$ be a ([[202410091049|finitely generated]]) free $R$-module. 
Then any submodule $N \subset M$ is free and $\dim_RN \leq \dim_RM$ 

## Proof

# Torsion and free modules
A finitely generated [[202410091156|torsion]] free $R$-module is free. 

## Proof

# Pulling back generators
Let $f:M \to N$ be a surjective module homomorphism. 
If $N$ is free, then there exists a free submodule $F \subset M$ such that $f\big|_F$ is an isomorphism and 
$$
M \cong \ker f \oplus F
$$

## Proof

# Quotenting out torsion
Let $M$ be a finitely generated $R$-module. 
Then $M \big/ M_{\text{tor}}$  is free. 
Moreover, there exists a free submodule $F\subset M$ such that 
$$
M \cong F \oplus M_{\text{tor}}.
$$
Lastly, $\dim_R F$ is well defined. 

## Proof

# Classifying torsion submodules
Let $M$ be a finitely generated torsion $R$-module. 
Then 
$$
M \cong \bigoplus_{p \ \text{prime}} M(p).
$$
Moreover, fore each prime $p$ (up to a multiplying by a unit), there is an isomorphism 
$$
M(p) \cong \bigoplus_{i=i}^{n_p} R \big/(p^{r_i})
$$
for unique integers $1 \leq r_1 \leq \dots \leq r_{n_p}$ 

## Proof

# Classification of finitely generated modules
Let $M$ be a finitely generated $R$-module. 
then 
$$
M \cong R^{\oplus b} \oplus R \big/(p_1^{r_1}) \oplus \dots \oplus R \big/(p_n^{r_n})
$$
for a unique $b \in \mathbb{N}$, which is called the **rank** or **Betti number** of $M$, and unique primes $p_i$ and natural numbers $r_i \in \mathbb{N}$ (these are unique up to permutation and multiplication by units of $R$).
Moreover, the isomorphism type of $M$ is unique determined by its rand and **elementary divisors** $p_1^{r_1}, \dots, p_n^{r_n}$. 

## Proof