---
title: free R-module
draft: false
tags:
  - definition
status: Done
---
# Definition
Let $X$ be a set. 
A **free $R$-module** is a [[202409301254|R-module]] $F^R(X)$ with a function (of sets) 
$$
i:X \longrightarrow F^R(X)
$$
such that for all $R$-modules $M$ and functions 
$$
j:X \to M
$$
there exists a unique $R$-module homomorphism 
$$
f:F^R(X) \to M
$$
with makes the following diagram commute:
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
X \arrow[dr, "j"] \arrow[r, "i"] & F^R(X) \arrow[d, "f"] \\
& M

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```

# Uniqueness
If they exist, free $R$-modules are unique (up to isomorphism). 

## Proof
Let $F^R(X)$ and $\tilde F^R(X)$ are free $R$-modules on $X$. 
Then we have the diagram by stacking diagrams from above
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\tikzcdset{scale cd/.style={every label/.append style={scale=#1},
    cells={nodes={scale=#1}}}}
	
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[scale cd=2, sep=huge]
X \arrow[r, "i"] \arrow[dr, "\tilde i"] \arrow[ddr, "i"] \arrow[dddr, "\tilde i",swap] 
& F^R(X) \arrow[d, "f"] \arrow[dd, bend left = 50, "\text{id}_{F^R(X)}"]\\
& \tilde F^R(X) \arrow[d, "g"] \arrow[dd, bend left = 50, "\text{id}_{\tilde F^R(X)}"]\\
& F^R(X) \arrow[d, "f"]\\
& \tilde F^R(X) \\

\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```
Then by uniqueness $f \circ g = \text{id}_{\tilde F^R(X)}$ and $g \circ f = \text{id}_{F^R(X)}$ thus $f:F^R(X) \to \tilde F^R(X)$ is an isomorphism. 

# Relation to direct sums
The direct sum $R^{\oplus X} \coloneqq \bigoplus_{x \in X} R$  is a free $R$-module on $X$. 

## Proof
Let 
$$
\begin{align*}
X &\longrightarrow R^{\oplus X} \\
x &\longmapsto 1_x
\end{align*}
$$
where $1_x$ is the element $(0, \dots, 0, 1, 0, \dots, 0)$ in the "$x$"th position even though they aren't ordered.
It is element with $1$ associated with the element $x$ and $0$ elsewhere. 

Given a set map $j:X \to M$ for an $R$-module $M$, let $f(1_x) = j(x)$. 
By $R$ linearity we have 
$$ 
f(\sum_x r_x) = \sum_x r_xf(1_x)
$$
which determines the function $f:R^{\oplus X} \to M$ which is a homomorphism of $R$-modules. 

## Notes
For finite free modules $R^{\oplus n}$ and $R^{\oplus m}$ we can write the generators out, then using the universal property we get the following relationship:
$$
\text{Hom}_R(R^{\oplus n}, R^{\oplus m}) \xrightarrow{\ bij \ } M_{n\times m}(R)
$$

Thus, free modules are anologues of vector spaces.
They have finite number of "basis" elements and maps between them are completely determined by these basis which can be written (unique for a choice of basis) as a matrix. 

# Relation to generating sets
A module $M$ is [[202410091049|generated]] by $X \subset M$ if and only if there exists a surjective module homomorphism
$$
F^R(X) \longrightarrow M
$$

Looking at free modules this means $M$ is finitely generated if and only if there is a surjective module homomorphism 
$$
R^{\oplus n} \longrightarrow M \qquad \text{for some } n \geq 1.
$$
Therefore, finitely generated means that the module is a quotient of $R^{\oplus n}$. 